Gerhard Schröder

Gerhard Fritz Kurt Schröder is a German politician, and
was Chancellor of Germany from 1998 to 2005. As
a member of the Social Democratic Party of Germany
(SPD), he led a coalition government of the SPD and the
Greens. Before becoming a full-time politician, he was
a lawyer, and before becoming Chancellor he served as
Prime Minister of Lower Saxony (1990–1998). Following
the 2005 federal election, which his party lost, after
three weeks of negotiations he stood down as Chancellor
in favour of Angela Merkel of the rival Christian Democratic
Union. He is currently the chairman of the board
of Nord Stream AG, after having been hired as a global
manager by investment bank Rothschild.
1 Early life and career
Schröder was born in Mossenberg, today an outlying
centre of Blomberg, in what is now North RhineWestphalia.
His father, Fritz Schröder, a lance corporal
in the Wehrmacht, was killed in action in World War II
in Romania on 4 October 1944, almost six months after
Gerhard’s birth. His mother, Erika (née Vosseler),
worked as an agricultural laborer so that she could support
herself and her two sons.
Schröder completed an apprenticeship in retail sales in
a Lemgo hardware shop from 1958 to 1961 and subsequently
worked in a Lage retail shop and after that
as an unskilled construction worker and a sales clerk in
Göttingen whilst studying at night school for a high school
diploma. He did not have to do military service because
his father had died in the war. In 1966, Schröder secured
entrance to a university, passing the Abitur exam
at Westfalen-Kolleg, Bielefeld. From 1966-71 he studied
law at the University of Göttingen. From 1972 onwards,
Schröder served as an assistant at the university.
In 1976, he passed his second law examination, and he
subsequently worked as a lawyer until 1990.
Among his more controversial cases, Schröder helped
Horst Mahler, a founding member of the BaaderMeinhof
terrorist group, to secure both an early release
from prison and permission to practice law again in
Germany.
Schröder joined the Social Democratic Party in 1963.
In 1978 he became the federal chairman of the Young
Socialists, the youth organisation of the SPD. He spoke
for the dissident Rudolf Bahro, as did President Jimmy
Carter, Herbert Marcuse and Wolf Biermann. In 1982 he
wrote an article on the idea of a red/green coalition for a
book at Olle & Wolter, Berlin; this appeared later in "Die
Zeit". Chancellor Willy Brandt, the SPD and SI chairman,
who reviewed Olle & Wolter at that time, had just
asked for more books on the subject. In 1980 Gerhard
Schröder was elected to the German Bundestag (federal
parliament), where he wore a sweater instead of the traditional
suit. He became chairman of the SPD Hanover
district. In 1985, Schröder met the GDR leader Erich
Honecker during a visit to East Berlin. In 1986, Schröder
was elected to the parliament of Lower Saxony and became
leader of the SPD group. After the SPD won the
state elections in June 1990, he became Prime Minister
of Lower Saxony as head of an SPD-Greens coalition; in
this position, he also won the 1994 and 1998 state elections.
2 In federal politics
Following his election as Minister-President in 1990,
Schröder became a member of the board of the federal
SPD. In 1997 and 1998 he served as President of the
Bundesrat, but he left office on 27 October, three days
before his term expired, when he became Chancellor as
head of an SPD-Green coalition. At the 22 September
2002 general elections, he secured another four-year
term, with a narrow nine-seat majority (down from 21).
After the resignation of Oskar Lafontaine as SPD Chairman
in March 1999, in protest at Schröder’s adoption
of a number of what Lafontaine considered "neo-liberal"
policies, Schröder took over his rival’s office as well.
In February 2004, he resigned as chairman of the SPD.
Franz Müntefering succeeded him as chairman.
On 22 May 2005, after the SPD lost to the Christian
Democrats (CDU) in North Rhine-Westphalia, Gerhard
Schröder announced he would call federal elections “as
soon as possible”. A motion of confidence was subsequently
defeated in the Bundestag on 1 July 2005 by 151
to 296 (with 148 abstaining), after Schröder urged members
not to vote for his government in order to trigger new
elections.
The 2005 German federal elections were held on 18
September. After the elections, neither Schröder’s SPDGreen
coalition nor the alliance between CDU/CSU and
the FDP led by Angela Merkel achieved a majority in par-
1
2 3 CHANCELLORSHIP
“SPD – Trust in Germany": Schröder in Esslingen.
liament, but the CDU/CSU had a stronger popular electoral
lead by one percentage point. Since the SPD had
been trailing the CDU by more than 15 points only weeks
before the election, this outcome was a surprise and was
mainly attributed to Schröder’s charisma and prowess as a
campaigner; polls consistently showed that he was much
more popular with the German people than Merkel. On
election night, both Schröder and Merkel claimed victory
and chancellorship, but after initially ruling out a grand
coalition with Merkel, Schröder and Müntefering entered
negotiations with her and the CSU’s Edmund Stoiber. On
10 October, it was announced that the parties had agreed
to form a grand coalition. Schröder agreed to cede the
chancellorship to Merkel, but the SPD would hold the majority
of government posts and retain considerable control
of government policy. Merkel was elected chancellor
on 22 November.
On 11 October, Schröder announced that he would not
take a post in the new Cabinet and, in November, he
confirmed that he would leave politics as soon as Merkel
took office. On 23 November 2005, he resigned his
Bundestag seat. Subsequently, he joined Ringier AG,
the publisher of some of the leading newspapers and magazines
in Switzerland and Europe, as a Zurich-based political
consultant and lobbyist. On 14 November, at the
SPD conference in Karlsruhe, Schröder urged members
of the SPD to support the proposed coalition, saying it
“carries unmistakably, perhaps primarily, the imprint of
the Social Democrats”. Many SPD members had previously
indicated that they supported the coalition, which
would have continued the policies of Schröder’s government,
but had objected to Angela Merkel replacing him
as Chancellor. The conference voted overwhelmingly to
approve the deal.
